bq.. In seventies post-Vietnam America, there was no album that captured the fall from Eden, the long slow afterburn of the sixties, its heartbreak, its disappointments, its spent possibilities, better than Jackson's masterpiece, ??Late for the Sky??. 

It's just a beautiful body of work. It's essential in making sense of the times. "Before the Deluge" still gives me goose-bumps, and it raises me to cause. "Late for the Sky," when those car doors slam at the end of the record, they still bring tears to my eye. And there was no more searching, yearning, loving music made for and about America at the time. 

In this and so much of Jackson's writing, you see the slow, meticulous crafting of the songs, the thoughtfulness. Jackson was one of the first songwriters I'd met who demonstrated the value of thinking hard about what you were saying, your subject.

p(author). -- Bruce Springsteen
""Jackson Browne's 2004 Induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame":../closing/bibliography.html#jbinduction"

My mission in "??Reason to Rock??":http://www.reasontorock.com has been to explore and reveal some of the depths of rock music that may be overlooked by the casual listener. 

At this point in my work, ten years on from its beginnings in 2001, as I survey the words that I have written and compare them to the territory to be explored, there is one major work that calls to me recurrently as needing attention, and that is Jackson Browne's album ??Late for the Sky??. 

As I've made clear elsewhere, most of my focus has been on individual tracks, because these generally display greater artistic and thematic cohesion than can be found on entire albums. While many of the best rock albums have a unified approach, sound and artistic achievement, few have depths of meaning that are spread across and infused throughout the entire album. ??Late for the Sky??, though, is a distinct and striking exception to this general rule. 

h2. Thematic Summary

As we go through the details of the album, what we will gradually see revealed is an examination of the human cycle of innocence/experience, illusion/disillusionment, enchantment/disenchantment,  birth/death, creation/dissolution. More distinctly, Browne looks at the cycle of attaching meaning to the people, places and events of one's life, and then seeing that meaning fade and disappear. And while much of Browne's earlier work spoke to very personal experiences at specific points within this cycle, and from the interior of this wheel, here Browne expands his scope, looking not only at very concrete, individual experiences along the way, but at the cycle as a whole. In doing so, he manages to evoke, not just a personal sense of the journeys of a handful of specific characters he's painted for us, but the mood of an entire generation at that particular point in time, a generation on its own journey from innocence to experience, painfully trying to transform its own fading illusions into some new sense of meaning. And, finally, Browne talks about nothing less than how this birth/death cycle might apply to the human race as a whole. 

h2. Album Title

Let's start simply with the album title: Late for the Sky. The phrase seems to have no possible literal sense -- the sky is always there, so how can one be late for it? -- so it demands a symbolic reading. The word "late" suggests both intention and failure: one meant to make the show, but did not get there in time. It also suggests a strong sense of the temporal: timing, as they say, is everything. The word "sky" suggests something vast and unchanging, existing beyond the bounds of normal human time. It also suggests a form of universal human aspiration, a symbol of our best intentions (especially at a time when man had landed on the moon only five years earlier). Combined, the two words suggest a lost opportunity whose meaning is amplified and projected over some vast scale. And so, in a mere four words, Browne has suggested the overall sweep of his work.

h2. Album Cover

Let's next pause lovingly, as the listener should, with a look at the "album cover":cover. An iTunes graphic, or even a CD cover, barely does it justice. The inspiration for the visual comes from the painting "??L'Empire des Lumi&#232;res??":ledl by Belgian painter "Ren&#233; Magritte":magritte. The cover art was created by photographer "Bob Seidemann":seidemann, after Browne showed him a poster of the Magritte painting and asked him for something similar, with an old Chevy in front of a house. The resulting graphic combines light and dark, the intimate glow of a bedroom window with a vast expanse of endless blue sky, an aging auto under a glowing streetlight, a tree with leaves fringed by sunlight. To some extent, the cover contains props that will make their appearances within some of the album's lyrics: the "stolen Chevrolet" from the "The Road and the Sky," the sky referenced in many of the album's songs. To an even greater extent, though, these elements of the cover presage the contrasts and conflicts of the album's thematic content. 

h2. Musical Approach

Browne works with a sympathetic set of vocalists and instrumentalists here, and makes full use of their talents. The extraordinary David Lindley plays violin and guitar and, as usual, always seems to perfectly complement Browne's vocals. The general musical approach is slow and thoughtful, with Browne's music leaving lots of space for other vocalists and musicians, and allowing the listener time for appreciation of each word and phrase. With only eight tracks on the album, and an average track length of five to six minutes, Browne is here venturing beyond the typical formats for both Top 40 recording artists and folk singers. The musical accompaniment is rich and thoughtful, carefully crafted to support and extend each of the songs in unique ways. 

h2. The Road and the Sky

Rather than doing a strictly linear rundown of the album's contents, let's start with "The Road and the Sky," the song that opens the second side of the original album, for it is this track, rather than the title song with which the album begins, that seems to me to be the best entry point into the album as a whole, the recording that brings together all the album's various elements and places them in relationship to one another. 

The first thing to note is that, despite the sorrow and tragedy running through the album, this is an upbeat song, a rocker, one filled with a sense of lunatic optimism. David Lindley's slide guitar, elsewhere used with haunting restraint, here gets amped up, propelling Browne's vocals along at a breakneck pace. 

The lyrics start with clearly symbolic intent, echoing the album's title.

bq. When we come to the place where the road and the sky collide,
Throw me over the edge and let my spirit glide. 

Here Browne quickly takes up the major thematic conflict of the album, and just as quickly states his position unequivocally: when stark realities conflict with idealistic aspirations, he seems to be saying, I'll take the idealistic aspirations every time. 

The next four lines candidly reveal some of Browne's motivation for such a decision. 

bq. They told me I was going to have to work for a living,
But all I want to do is ride.
I don't care where we're going from here,
Honey, you decide.

The next verse again takes up the issues of dreams vs. reality. 

bq. Well I spend my time at the bottom of a wishing well,
And I can hear my dreams singing clear as a bell.
I used to know where they ended and the world began,
But now it's getting hard to tell:
I could be just around the corner from heaven or a mile from hell.

Here Browne amplifies the depth of his self-knowledge referenced in the first verse, freely admitting that he's not sure he can any longer tell dreams from reality, or whether his pursuit of these dreams is bringing him closer to salvation or damnation. (And an interesting implication of his image, located at the bottom of a well, is that it's one of the few places one can imagine where all you can see is sky.)

But now we finally get to the chorus, and the central image of the song and, perhaps, of the album. Seemingly indicating knowledge of his own shortcomings, the pace of the song slows, with Browne singing in a tone more confessional than boastful, over background cowbell percussion that sounds like the stuttering engine of an aging vehicle that may fail at any moment.

bq. I'm just rolling away from yesterday,
Behind the wheel of a stolen Chevrolet.
I'm going to get a little higher,
And see if I can hot-wire reality.

Continuing the imagery that ended the first verse, Browne here constructs, in four lines, the ultimate image of rock "liberation":liberation. Building on the twin legacies of "Chuck Berry":berry and Jack Kerouac, Browne takes to the road in another automobile, fleeing the past and ready for the future, whatever it may bring, getting a little higher (closer to the sky) as he goes, and fully prepared to encounter reality, commandeer it, and incorporate it in his wild ride. 

Now comes the final verse. 

bq. Now can you see those dark clouds gathering up ahead?
They're going to wash this planet clean like the Bible said.
Now you can hold on steady and try to be ready,
But everybody's going to get wet.
Don't think it won't happen just because it hasn't happened yet.

Notice that Browne has here just delivered on the promise made in the chorus. He starts by pointing out, to his listener/companion, the presence of some very real dark clouds occupying the sky ahead. This is, presumably, a chunk of reality. But now, he "hot-wires" that reality: he attaches meaning to it, he builds a story around it, he uses it for his own purpose. And then he ends with words expressing the sentiment of any true visionary, any storyteller: "Don't think it won't happen just because it hasn't happened yet."

One could certainly question whether this song is really the thematic center of the album, since it seems to contradict or at least reduce in significance the dirgeful disillusionment expressed in much of the rest of the album's content. But I view the song this way for several reasons. 

* Its placement at the center of the album, at its core, so to speak. 
* Its references to the Sky, clearly one of the major symbols used throughout the album.
* Its twin inclusion of both the Chevrolet and the Sky from the album cover. 
* Its distance from its subject matter: this is the song that is least dependent on concrete, personal details, and hence most clearly allegorical.
* The breadth of its scope. At its most narrow, the album examines particular characters, at particular points in their own personal cycles of enchantment/disenchantment. Stepping back a little farther, parts of the album look at this cycle as a whole. But this song not only does that, but takes the perspective of the artist, the person writing us these songs and telling us these tales, and examines his role as not only the enchanted, but the enchanter: the person trying to hot-wire reality. Looking at all the perspectives we will find in the album, it is this one that seems the most comprehensive.

h2. For a Dancer

Where "The Road and the Sky" is the album's manic rocker, celebrating the ups and downs of the romantic quest, "For a Dancer" is its quiet heart, examining the meaning of death. 

I find this track remarkable in that it combines a very personal tale of loss with an examination of the meaning of physical death, and does justice to both. 

While songwriters are practiced at dealing with the subject of love, singing about death is a much more difficult task. Browne succeeds here by combining specific and personal details with a very clear and unusual perspective. 

The recording begins with just Jackson's voice and piano, singing slowly and thoughtfully. 

bq. Keep a fire burning in your eye.
Pay attention to the open sky.
You never know what will be coming down.

Note Browne's oblique approach to his subject, as well as another usage of the sky as a symbol, this time in the sense of a prime mover from which events emerge, an infinite and unforgiving source of beginnings and endings. 

Now Browne moves closer to the central event of the song. 

bq. I don't remember losing track of you.
You were always dancing in and out of view.
I must have thought you'd always be around,
Always keeping things real by playing the clown.
Now you're nowhere to be found.

He continues his oblique approach, talking at first only about "losing track" of someone. Also, note that he is singing to the person he has lost, as if the dancer were in some sense still present in his life. In these few lines he also deftly introduces the theme of dancing, and uses the term in the sense of moving closer and farther away, this playful use of the term resonating with the image of the dancer playing the clown. Finally, though, Browne states that she is nowhere to be found, the sombre tone of this final line suggesting her physical death.

Doug Haywood's bass joins Browne on "found," the last word of the last line, and begins an eloquent, questioning dialogue with Browne's piano. Now drums join them as well at the beginning of the next verse, accelerating the pace of the song and providing it with a more regular forward movement, somewhat counteracting the direct introduction of the song's subject. 

bq. I don't know what happens when people die.
Can't seem to grasp it as hard as I try.
It's like a song I can hear, playing right in my ear,
That I can't sing:
I can't help listening.

Note how Browne pulls back from the direct examination of the dancer's death, into a more general discussion of the subject, thus avoiding an immersion into pathos. His matter-of-fact statement that he doesn't know what happens when people die catches us a bit off-guard, and pulls us into more emotionally neutral territory, perfectly setting us up for the surprise and searing depth of the simile that follows, comparing death to an elusive tune that the singer can hear but not reproduce.   

Now Browne returns to the personal tale, standing at graveside as his friend is lowered into her grave. As you listen, note that the singer is now joined by additional musicians and background singers, creating a sense of a shared community, serving the same function in the song as friends and family might at an actual service, helping to reduce our sense of loss by reminding us of those we still have by our side.

bq. And I can't help feeling stupid standing 'round,
Crying as they ease you down,
'Cause I know that you'd rather we were dancing:
Dancing our sorrow away,
(Right on dancing)
No matter what fate chooses to play.
(There's nothing you can do about it anyway.)

Here, again, Browne skirts any typical treatment of his subject matter, for though he reports his tears, the emotion he comments on is of feeling stupid. Still addressing the lost dancer, he now talks of dancing directly, and as a way of finding joyful purpose despite the vagaries of life. Expressing this joy, his voice surges on the last line, soaring above the instruments.

As the musical group starts the next verse, they do so with a sense of joy and unison, banding together to confront the darkness. 

bq. Just do the steps that you've been shown,
By everyone you've ever known,
Until the dance becomes your very own,
No matter how close to yours
Another's steps have grown:
In the end there is one dance you'll do alone.

Here it is almost as if the dancer is speaking to the singer, rather than the other way around. The dancer's message emphasizes both the community in which we grow, and that nurtures us, as well as the individuality of each person's expression within that community, and the ultimate isolation wrought by death. 

Note how the music matches the words on the last line, with the background singers growing quiet, leaving Browne to sing those words alone. 

David Lindley's violin plays now, finally giving voice to the sadness Browne has avoided directly confronting with his words, yet at the same time dancing himself, as if expressing the spirit of the lost dancer, as well as those who mourn her passing. 

With Lindley now having touched the tragic core of the singer's tale, Browne is now freed to step back and take a broader view. 

bq. Keep a fire for the human race.
Let your prayers go drifting into space.
You never know what will be coming down.

Note how the words here mirror the first three lines that started the song, starting with "Keep a fire" and ending with "You never know what will be coming down." Yet something has changed, for the singer is no longer alone, but is accompanied by others this time around, both instrumentalists and singers. At the same time, his view is broader, taking the perspective of the human race as a whole, in contrast to the individual lives of the singer and the dancer with which he started. 

bq. Perhaps a better world is drawing near...
Just as easily it could all disappear,
Along with whatever meaning you might have found.
Don't let the uncertainty turn you around,
(The world keeps turning around and around)
Go on and make a joyful sound.

Here Browne speaks directly to the album's thematic core, talking about our need to create meaning for ourselves and others, even if that meaning has no ultimate reality. Again, as in "The Road and the Sky," Browne clearly chooses a side, chooses joy and meaning and intention, despite their lack of permanence, despite the absence of any indication that these arise from any source other than the human spirit itself. 

Browne and company now launch triumphantly into the final verse, again seemingly expressing a message from the missing dancer.  

bq. Into a dancer you have grown,
From a seed somebody else has thrown:
Go on ahead and throw some seeds of your own,
And somewhere between the time you arrive
And the time you go,
May lie a reason you were alive,
But you'll never know.

See how the song draws to a conclusion with the singer having himself become a dancer. Now we can see that the dramatic movement of the song has not been into death, but a transcendence of death, with the lost dancer passing something on to the singer who remains behind. The song ends not with a death but with a birth, as if the singer has emerged from a chrysalis. He knows now that what it means to dance, to create meaning through his movements, even though the universe may never acknowledge that meaning. 

Musically, the song ends with piano, bass, organ and violin dancing together one last time before bringing the track to a close.

I can't think of another song that is at the same time so sombre and so joyous, that deals with such a tragic event and at the same time delivers such a sense of overarching meaning and purpose, that so skillfully manages to evoke the tragedy and finality of death, yet places that death in a larger context, without resorting to some divine _deus ex machina_ as the source of that context.

h2. Late for the Sky

Having now obtained a broader perspective on Browne's intentions, let's return  to the start of the album and the title track that opens side 1. The lyrics tell the story of a failed relationship. The scene could be the upstairs bedroom of the house pictured on the album cover. The song presents a stark contrast between intentions and accomplishments, realities and perceptions, ascent and descent, togetherness and isolation. 

The singer expresses a sense of quiet despair, describing their physical togetherness, yet ultimately acknowledging the emptiness of their relationship.

bq. The words had all been spoken,
And somehow the feeling still wasn't right,
And still we continued on through the night;
Tracing our steps from the beginning,
Until they vanished into the air:
Trying to understand how our lives had led us there.

bq. Looking hard into your eyes,
There was nobody I'd ever known:
Such an empty surprise, to feel so alone.

Notice how the singer talks about feeling alone and disconnected from his lover, and also makes us feel what he is expressing through his imagery: "Looking hard into your eyes, there was nobody I'd ever known." 

bq. Now for me some words come easy,
But I know that they don't mean that much,
Compared with the things that are said when lovers touch.
You never knew what I loved in you,
I don't know what you loved in me:
Maybe the picture of somebody you were hoping I might be.

bq. Awake again, I can't pretend, and I know I'm alone,
And close to the end of the feeling we've known.

Browne now draws a contrast between words and physicality, between aspirations and actuality, between sleeping and waking, between pretending and being, between dreams and reality. 

bq. How long have I been sleeping?
How long have I been drifting alone through the night?
How long have I been dreaming I could make it right,
If I closed my eyes, and tried with all my might,
To be the one you need?

bq. Awake again, I can't pretend, and I know I'm alone,
And close to the end of the feeling we've known.

bq. How long have I been sleeping?
How long have I been drifting alone through the night?
How long have I been running for that morning flight
Through the whispered promises and the changing light
Of the bed where we both lie,
Late for the sky.

In some ways, this entire song builds to that last line, the title for the song and the album, that concise image of disillusionment, of being "late for the sky." 

Part of Browne's achievement here lies in his avoidance of much of the histrionics and drama that usually accompany failing relationships. There is no self-pity, no condemnation for the other, no harsh words, slamming doors or fights. The song, as well as the story it tells, betray an absence of any of these mechanisms we usually use to distance ourselves from the emptiness at the core of these situations. By avoiding these, Browne accomplishes the difficult task of bringing us right to the heart of the loss he feels, lets us feel it with him, rather than simply telling us about it. 

By avoiding use of these other dramatic elements, Browne is also able to focus much more clearly on the heart of the matter: the loss of meaning that the two once attached to each other and their relationship. In fact, the primary scene painted by the song is one of people going through the motions of a relationship, yet bereft of any of the usual meaning associated with such actions. This opening scene clearly sets the stage for the issues of enchantment and disenchantment that will be explored through the rest of the album. 

The aching beauty of the music and production on this track should be noted as well. In particular, piano, bass and electric guitar provide a quiet, reflective, resonant backing to Browne's vocal delivery.  

h2. Fountain of Sorrow

This one of the album's most hauntingly beautiful and enigmatic songs. Throughout it, Browne keeps reversing perspectives, balancing innocence and experience, illusion and disillusionment, sorrow and joy. 

Let's see how he starts. 

bq. Looking through some photographs I found inside a drawer,
I was taken by a photograph of you.
There were one or two I know that you would have liked a little more,
But they didn't show your spirit quite as true.
You were turning 'round to see who was behind you;
And I took your childish laughter by surprise;
And at the moment that my camera happened to find you,
There was just a trace of sorrow in your eyes.

Notice that, even though this is a verse about cameras, photos and photography, it is the singer who is taken by a photograph, not the other way around. This is the first example of wordplay that suggests the reversal of normal perspectives that occurs throughout the song. 

Notice all the other contrasts offered in this first verse:

* The appearance of the singer as captured in photographs, vs. her spirit;
* The subject turning around to see the photographer behind her;
* The subject's childish laughter vs. the sorrow in her eyes. 

So we have the yin and yang of appearance vs. reality, looking forward vs. looking back, joy vs. sorrow, adulthood vs. childhood, all embodied in this opening verse, this very simple and concrete story of the singer taking a photograph of another person. 

bq. Now the things that I remember seem so distant and so small,
Though it hasn't really been that long a time.
What I was seeing wasn't what was happening at all,
Although for a while our path did seem to climb.
When you see through love's illusions, there lies the danger;
And your perfect lover just looks like a perfect fool;
So you go running off in search of a perfect stranger,
While the loneliness seems to spring from your life
Like a fountain from a pool.

Now the singer becomes more distant from his subject, and at the same time more reflective and philosophical. He talks again about looking back, about appearance vs. reality, about illusions and disillusionment. And we have more wordplay, contrasting the very different faces of perfection when considering "your perfect lover, "a perfect fool" and a "perfect stranger."" 

And now he introduces the central image of the song, talking about a spring of loneliness welling up from a pool, suggesting the inexhaustible supply of this feeling, and perhaps the inevitability of confronting it. 

Yet the chorus that follows describes this fountain in a different way. 

bq. Fountain of sorrow, fountain of light...
You've known that hollow sound of your own steps in flight.
You've had to hide sometimes, but now you're all right,
And it's good to see your smiling face tonight.

These four lines offer up the beautiful, enigmatic, shimmering core of the song. Notice how the singer now seems to be singing to the fountain, as much as to the person he was addressing earlier. And while it is still a fountain of sorrow, it is also a fountain of light, as if the sorrow that we feel is part and parcel of a beneficial illumination that brings us clarity. And notice how the singer suggests that the tragedy is in the need for the sorrow to be hidden, as much as in the sorrow itself, and how the lines finally end, not with sorrow, but with warmth and gratitude. 

In this next verse, notice how the singer seems to be at a perfect fulcrum point between innocence and experience, still feeling hope, yet already aware of life's limitations.  

bq. Now for you and me it may not be that hard to reach our dreams,
But that magic feeling never seems to last.
And while the future's there for anyone to change, still you know it seems...
It would be easier sometimes to change the past.
I'm just one or two years and a couple of changes behind you,
In my lessons at love's pain and heartache school --
Where if you feel too free and you need something to remind you,
There's this loneliness springing up from your life,
Like a fountain from a pool.

Again, we feel the inevitability of this fountain of sorrow and yet, again, see it revealed to be more than we thought at first. 

bq. Fountain of sorrow, fountain of light:
You've known that hollow sound of your own steps in flight.
You've had to hide sometimes, but now you're all right,
And it's good to see your smiling face tonight.

Now the music slows almost to a stop, with just Jackson's piano playing slowly, as if bringing the song to a close. But then, just when we think it might be over, the other musicians join in again. 

Now we have the chorus repeated, but with additional words. 

bq. Fountain of sorrow, fountain of light:
You've known that hollow sound of your own steps in flight.
You've had to struggle, you've had to fight,
To keep understanding and compassion in sight,
You could be laughing at me, you've got the right,
But you go on smiling, so clear and so bright...!

The music here is warm, buoyant and radiant as Browne sings the final words. And so we end with this final enigmatic image, the smile on the Buddha, the joy of awareness outshining the sorrow of experience. 

h2. Farther On

In my early years I hid my tears
And passed my days alone
Adrift on an ocean of loneliness
My dreams like nets were thrown
To catch the love that I'd heard of
In books and films and songs
Now there's a world of illusion and fantasy
In the place where the real world belongs

Still I look for the beauty in songs
To fill my head and lead me on
Though my dreams have come up torn and empty
As many times as love has come and gone

To those gentle ones my memory runs
To the laughter we shared at the meals
I filled their kitchens and living rooms
With my schemes and my broken wheels
It was never clear how far or near
The gates to my citadel lay
They were cutting from stone some dreams of their own
But they listened to mine anyway

I'm not sure what I'm trying to say
It could be I've lost my way
Though I keep a watch over the distance
Heaven's no closer than it was yesterday

And the angels are older
They know not to wait up for the sun
They look over my shoulder
At the maps and the drawings of the journey I've begun

Now the distance leads me farther on
Though the reasons I once had are gone
I keep thinking I'll find what I'm looking for
In the sand beneath the dawn

But the angels are older
They can see that the sun's setting fast
They look over my shoulder
At the vision of paradise contained in the light of the past
And they lay down behind me
To sleep beside the road till the morning has come
Where they know they will find me
With my maps and my faith in the distance
Moving farther on

h2. The Late Show

Everyone I've ever known has wished me well
Anyway that's how it seems, it's hard to tell
Maybe people only ask you how you're doing
'cause that's easier than letting on how little they could care
But when you know that you've got a real friend somewhere
Suddenly all the others are so much easier to bear

Now to see things clear it's hard enough I know
While you're waiting for reality to show
Without dreaming of the perfect love
And holding it so far above
That if you stumbled onto someone real, you'd never know
(you'd never know)
You could be with somebody who is lonely too
(sometimes it doesn't show)
He might be trying to get across to you
(words can be so slow)
When your own emptiness is all that's getting through
There comes a point when you're not sure why you're still talking
I passed that point long ago
(long ago)
Now I'm so tired of all this circling
And all these glimpses of the end
(you know it's useless to pretend)
That's all the voices say:
"you'll go right on circling
Until you've found some kind of friend"

h2. Walking Slow

I saw you through the laughter and the noise
You were talking with the soldiers and the boys
While they scuffled for your weary smiles
I thought of all the empty miles
And the years that I've spent looking for your eyes
(looking for your eyes)
And now I'm sitting here wondering what to say
(that you might recognize)
Afraid that all these words might scare you away
(and break through the disguise)
No one ever talks about their feelings anyway
Without dressing them in dreams and laughter
I guess it's just too painful otherwise

Look--
It's like you're standing in the window
Of a house nobody lives in
And I'm sitting in a car across the way
(let's just say)
It's an early model chevrolet
(let's just say)
It's a warm and windy day
You go and pack your sorrow
The trash man comes tomorrow
Leave it at the curb and we'll just roll away

h2. Walking slow down the avenue
Through my old neighborhood
Don't know why I'm happy
I've got no reason to feel this good
Maybe it's because I'm all alone
And I've got no place to go
And everywhere I look I see
Another person I'll never know

I got a thing or two to say
Before I walk on by
I'm feeling good today
But if die a little farther along
I'm trusting everyone to carry on

Pretty little girl--
Running up and down the street with no shoes on
I got a pretty little girl of my own at home
Sometimes we forget we love each other
And we fight for no reason
I don't know what I'll do if she ever leaves me alone

I got a thing or two to say
Before I walk on by
I'm feelin' good today
But if I die a little farther along
I'm trustin' everyone to carry on

I'm puttin' down my left foot
I'm puttin' down my right foot

I got a thing or two to say
Before I walk on by
I'm feelin' good today
But if I die a little farther along
I'm trusting everyone to carry on

h2. Before The Deluge

Some of them were dreamers
And some of them were fools
Who were making plans and thinking of the future
With the energy of the innocent
They were gathering the tools
They would need to make their journey back to nature

While the sand slipped through the opening
And their hands reached for the golden ring
When their hearts they turned to each other's hearts for refuge
In the troubled years that came before the deluge

Some of them knew pleasure
And some of them knew pain
And for some of them it was only the moment that mattered
And on the brave and crazy wings of youth
They went flying around in the rain
And their feathers, once so fine, grew torn and tattered

And in the end they traded their tired wings
For the resignation that living brings
And exchanged love's bright and fragile glow
For the glitter and the rouge
And in a moment they were swept before the deluge

Let the music keep our spirits high
Let the buildings keep our children dry
Let creation reveal its secrets by and by, by and by
When the light that's lost within us reaches the sky

Some of them were angry
At the way the earth was abused
By the men who learned how to forge her beauty into power
And they struggled to protect her from them
Only to be confused
By the magnitude of her fury in the final hour

And when the sand was gone and the time arrived
In the naked dawn only a few survived
And in attempts to understand a thing so simple and so huge
Believed that they were meant to live after the deluge

Let the music keep our spirits high
Let the buildings keep our children dry
Let creation reveal it's secrets by and by, by and by
When the light that's lost within us reaches the sky


[cover]http://www.bobseidemann.com/brown_print.html
[magritte]http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rene_Magritte
[ledl]http://lewebpedagogique.com/2devadepied/files/2008/01/ma958l-empire-des-lumieres-posters.jpg
[seidemann]http://www.bobseidemann.com/
[liberation]../elements/liberation.html
[berry]../artists/chuck_berry.html
[halloffame]: http://rockhall.com/inductees/jackson-browne/
