This is a great album, marred only by the somewhat self-conscious awareness of its greatness. In terms of personnel, this is a transitional album. Lopez has been replaced on drums by Max Weinberg. Jon Landau has come aboard and gets co-production credits with original manager/producer Mike Appel. Keyboards player and overall musical influence David Sancious appears on only one track, about to move on to a career as solo jazz artist and popular session musician. 

Judging by the time it took to record, the number of players given credits, the diversity of instrumentation and mood from one track to the next, the overall complexity of the production, and the singer/songwriter's later discussions, this is easily the most ambitious studio effort of Springsteen's career. Springsteen and company were quite intentionally reaching for greatness on this effort, and achieved their goal. From the cover artwork to the last note of the album, there is a classic look and feel to the entire effort. 

If the album has a flaw, it is only in its devout seriousness. The light-hearted senses of humor and adventure readily available on the first two albums are already gone. Whereas the hero of "Rosalita" was able to undercut the seriousness of his intent with comic misadventure and energetic excess, there is now a sense of desperation surrounding the hero of "Thunder Road." Whereas Rosie was "the one" and the hero's "stone desire," Mary is frankly "not a beauty" but merely "alright." And where Springsteen's earlier characters had individual eccentricities that made them seem like living flesh, everything not frankly mythic or tragic has been shorn away from these later figures. 

Caveats aside, however, this is probably the one Springsteen album to own if you can afford only one, and is full of great music. Includes "Thunder Road," "Tenth Avenue Freeze Out," "Backstreets," "Born to Run," "Meeting Across the River" and "Jungleland." 