Where ??Baxter's?? seemed to be a sort of audio collage reflecting the band's interests, activities and lifestyle -- a postcard from planet Airplane, ending "Wish you were here" -- many of the individual tracks on ??Crown of Creation?? are both more distinct and more focused works, each its own particular world, rather than just different rooms in the sprawling mansion of ??Surrealistic Pillow??. At this point, too, the band seems capable of commenting cogently on the society they are rebelling against, rather than just thumbing their nose at it. 

"Lather," written and sung by Grace Slick, is a fable about a child-man turning 30, and being told that he is no longer young. The song is a small masterpiece, a pure distillation of the culture and counter-culture unfolding at the time. What makes the song so effective, and so singular, is its emotional distance from its subject, its ability to evoke emotions through words, sounds and story rather than the tone of the singer, and its willingness for the subject to ultimately be a tragic figure, rather than a heroic one, such as The Who's "Happy Jack" or The Beatles' "Fool on the Hill." 

"Triad," also sung by Slick, is an entirely serious look at the possibility of a romantic threesome. Like "Lather," the tone of the singer is thoughtful and reflective, rather than emotional and forceful. The song was written by David Crosby, then of The Byrds, and his bandmates had already refused to feature the song on one of their albums before Crosby offered it to the Airplane. While Crosby's song as sung by a man already crossed society's norms, Slick's reading stretches the bounds of social propriety even further. This recording is a beautiful, and entirely unique, love song. 

The title track, by Paul Kantner, is a powerful exploration of the conflict felt by youth in the late sixties. Music and words sketch a conflict between an older generation that prizes stability, and a younger generation that wants to rock the boat. The song structure is non-traditional, more like a spare, modern poem set to music than anything like a traditional repeated verse-chorus structure. 