The distance traveled from the last album is enormous, in many respects. Whereas the former cover showed a happy and successful Springsteen leaning on the back of Clarence Clemons, the cover of this album has a quite obvious B-Movie "film noir" look to it, with Springsteen disheveled and clad in a T-shirt, looking like he is stumbling bleary-eyed out of a cheap motel at six in the morning. Whereas the look of the last album had a rich and classic design, the simulated typewriter look of the fonts used on this album are trying to impress no one. Three years passed between the last album and this one, a period during which legal battles prevented Springsteen from recording. And whereas the last album was carefully recorded with a host of different musicians each selected to play a well-defined role on a specific track, musical credits on this album are confined to the current regulars of the E Street Band. And finally, the lyrics have gone from disenchanted romanticism to brutal honesty. In three albums Springsteen has gone from wild innocence, to a determined defiance, and finally to a bleak world in which his protagonist's hopes and dreams are his worst enemies, since he seems condemned to live in a world where they can never be realized, and serve only to taunt him. The album seems full of a sort of existential alienation, in which the characters are unable to feel any connection with anything. 

And whereas on prior works there was at times an obvious distance between Springsteen the artist and some of the subjects he observed, on ??Darkness?? that distance simply collapses. So while the doomed loser of "Meeting Across the River" was clearly more of a character observed than Springsteen himself, Springsteen seems to completely inhabit the personae of the outsiders who haunt ??Darkness.??

Includes "Badlands," "Adam Raised a Cain," "Candy's Room," "Racing in the Street," "The Promised Land," "Streets of Fire" and "Darkness on the Edge of Town."