As you can probably tell by now, I think this is a terrific album. Four out of the fourteen cuts are covers of other artists' material, but all of the tracks fit together seamlessly -- not so much out of any grand design but simply due to the converging interests, sympathies and intentions of the participants. This is one of those fortunate cases where what was originally a double album on vinyl now fits onto a single CD, making the recording exceptional in terms of the quantity of music offered. And even though all of the material is stylistically very consistent, it is not at all repetitious. All of the tracks stand up to repeated listening. The average song length is about five minutes, giving the musicians room to stretch out and solo occasionally, while avoiding the self-indulgent excesses that occasionally plagued Clapton's previous bands, such as Cream and Blind Faith. 

Overall, the album has a very unique sound to it. The music sounds very loose and spontaneous, yet at the same time very focused and intense. Clapton's and Allman's guitars are everywhere -- playing rhythm, playing riffs, playing breaks, playing along with and on top of the vocals -- yet the musicians and singers ultimately complement each other rather than competing, as they often seemed to do in Cream. Allman's tasteful lyricism balances and influences Clapton's more dramatic style on guitar. The result is never polished, but always inspired. Some of the songs are pretty, but the tracks are never __merely__ pretty, with the guitars and bluesy vocals consistently adding texture and substance to the outings. 

This is a faultless recording, and an absolutely essential addition to any rock collection.