This is probably the group's most approachable and conventional record. They had signed with a new record company, and were actually being urged to write songs that could conceivably be played on a radio station. While the band had broken up by the time the album was released, the attempt was ultimately successful. Two of the tracks on here, "Sweet Jane" and "Rock & Roll," achieved considerable FM airplay in the seventies, and became staples in album rock radio programming. At the same time, the group still maintained its individuality and uniquely artistic stance. While The Rolling Stones were singing "I know / It's only rock and roll / But I like it" -- hardly a compelling argument, in my book -- Lou Reed was singing "Despite all the __amp__utations / you know you just could go out and dance to the Rock & Roll __sta__tion" -- expressing a much more interesting, idiosyncratic and meaningful viewpoint. 

The music on this album is also the closest of all the original four to conventional, late-sixties rock. Maureen Tucker, the group's drummer since the departure of MacLise, was out on maternity leave, and was replaced by a more conventional artisan, Billy Yule. Electric guitars were favored over acoustic 12-strings, although with little feedback or distortion. Yet at the same time there are lovely, unique instrumental touches on the album, and experimental sounds, such as the odd instrumental break that punctuates the otherwise wholesome musical question, "Who Loves the Sun?" The electric guitar parts on "Sweet Jane" and "Rock & Roll" are also beautiful and interesting. 

Although I've only mentioned three songs so far, the other seven on the album are all good as well. There is another long song, "Oh! Sweet Nuthin'," but this one works, and is in fact another of the album's highlights. The other material is all interesting and worthwhile.