What was initially a demo tape for this new batch of songs ultimately became the final album. Featuring only Springsteen's vocals, guitar and harmonica, this is essentially a sort of modern folk album. Whereas on ??Darkness?? the characters were outsiders and losers and probably criminals, the details of their existence were fuzzily romanticized, guilty only of "wanting things that can only be found in the darkness on the edge of town." But here, in the title song, the protagonist speaks openly of going on a killing spree, being caught and awaiting execution. The rest of the album is similarly detailed. Small wonder that Springsteen was unable to record these songs with the E Street Band. Earlier songs had talked about alienation and isolation, but in a sort of romanticized way that allowed contradictions like a group sing-along of "Hungry Heart" to happen. But there was a stark, matter-of-fact realism to these new songs that simply allowed no room for the implied community or the emotional energy of a band rendition. Even when performing these songs live, with the E Street Band on stage behind him, there is not much for them to do. If the theme of rock music is liberation, then there is nothing for a rock band to do here, for there is no liberation offered, either comic or otherwise. If anything, this is an album entirely about the folly of liberation, ending as it does by marvelling that "at the end of every hard earned day, people still find some reason to believe." 

One can almost picture this album as some sort of demented dare (or rock singer's version of a "Survivor" television show). "You think you're a songwriter, huh? OK. Take away the rock band. Ditch the recording studio. Leave behind the popular and populist topics. We're going to put you on an island with nothing but a guitar, a harmonica, a 4-track tape recorder, and a bunch of murderers and assorted criminals to sing about. Now let's see how many albums you can sell!"

While ??Nebraska?? was never a commercial success on the scale of Springsteen's more popular albums, it achieved all of the goals Springsteen could possibly have had for it. The songs were haunting and effective, proving Springsteen worthy to stand in the tradition of predecessors such as Woody Guthrie. And while the album never found a large audience, it did find a dedicated one, attracting fans who might otherwise be repelled by the big arena shows and Top Ten hits. And he rebounded commercially on later albums, especially ??Born in the USA,?? selling more albums than ever. In his live shows, he was able to integrate the ??Nebraska?? material, giving these songs wider exposure than they enjoyed through original album sales. 

Includes "Nebraska," "Atlantic City," "Johnny 99" " and "Reason to Believe." 