A comprehensive 5-CD collection that includes essentially all of the band's originally released music, plus a generous collection of demos, live recordings, and studio recordings not released on any of the original four albums. Four of the five CDs contain the original VU albums in their original running orders, so that this collection almost renders the separate albums unnecessary. I say "almost" because there are a few differences: the self-titled third album is represented by the so-called "closet mix" of this album, and the classic "Sweet Jane" is included in its original, longer version. In the case of the ??VU?? album, I think the owner of this compilation gets the better deal. One of the best songs on the album, "Some Kinda Love," is actually a completely different -- and much better -- recording than the one on the currently available stand-alone CD. In general, the closet mix has the vocals featured more prominently, which makes for a more intimate feel that seems closer to the spirit of many of the songs. Also, the closet mix is the collection that was originally released on vinyl. Some listeners have criticized these versions for sounding muffled (as if recorded in a closet), but this doesn't seem much of an issue to me. 

"Sweet Jane" is a different story. At the time ??Loaded?? was being prepared for its original release, record company officials decided to edit out a portion of the song. Twenty-five years later, the full original version was released on this compilation. There are two problems with the longer version: 1) after so many years of hearing the shorter version, the longer version just sounds __wrong__; 2) rock musicians sometimes need good editors as much as novelists, and this seems to be one of those cases -- to my ears, the song works better without the omitted portion, which seems to do nothing except slow the pace of the song just when it is reaching its climax on the shorter version. There is recorded evidence that the song evolved radically for some period before being captured in the studio, so there is little justification for viewing the edited segment as an essential missing piece. 

Bottom line: this boxed set is well worth the investment, and in one package will get you all the Velvet Underground music most of us will ever need. 
