This album from Springsteen and the E Street Band was a welcome surprise in many ways. First, there is the reunion with the band, since Springsteen had not recorded with them for a period of fifteen years preceding this album. Then, there is a fresh sound brought by a new producer, Brendan O'Brien. In many ways, this seems like the most carefully arranged and produced effort from Springsteen since ??Born to Run??. Finally, there is the thematic focus on the events and aftermath of the horrific terrorist attack on New York city that occurred on 09/11/2001. In other hands, it is hard to see how an artist of Springsteen's stature could avoid the accusation of trying to cash in on this national disaster, but the entire album expresses such a heart-felt desire to support the community -- to express its unresolved feelings, to help its members along in their process of healing, to literally sing of its otherwise unsung heros -- that any such accusations simply fall away before they can be spoken. 

The biggest surprise from this album, in the end, is the complete demonstration of the success of Springsteen's conception of his role as an artist, a vision he has been steadfastly pursuing and refining over a career of thirty-some years. Unlike many other rock artists, he has continuously pursued a serious quest to explore the limits of his powers. His music has consistently reflected a mission to express the feelings and describe the situations of people who would otherwise have no voice in our society. He has been a folk artist in the most essential sense, expressing the deepest feelings of a larger audience, and bringing his art to an audience that otherwise might not know the solace of such expression. 

In this time, and in this place, Springsteen finds an audience that has never needed him more, and he rises to the occasion as if his entire life had been in preparation for this moment.