This is a double album with twenty songs on it. This is also the album on which Springsteen matures, accepting his role as a late 20th century folk singer and anointed spokesman for his audience. So while Springsteen is full of alienated rage and sees himself as an outsider on ??Darkness??, here he pens a sort of cheery rocker, "Hungry Heart," about a man who walks out on his wife and kids and seems incapable of forming any lasting relationships. (When performed live, this song is always an audience participation favorite. I'm not sure what it means to have 10,000 fans happily singing "Got a wife and kids in Baltimore, Jack; I went out for a ride and I never came back," but it certainly is an interesting phenomenon.) 

"Two Hearts" may be the most telling song on the album. Springsteen sings:

bq. Once I spent my time playing tough guy scenes, 
But I was living in a world of childish dreams. 
Someday these childish dreams must end, 
To become a man and grow up to dream again. 

The title of the album, and the fact that it is a double album, seem to convey the singer's new intention to represent a broad constituency of feelings and characters in his music. This is also Springsteen's Auto Album, with profiles of cars punctuating the lyric sheet, and cars figuring prominently in nearly half the songs. Springsteen seems fully aware that these vehicles are both a blessing and a curse, representing a sense of power and release but also isolating their riders from their communities and from each other. 

This album also contains a couple of deeply felt ballads. "Independence Day" is about the bittersweet senses of independence and separation that come between parents and children as they grow older. The title song is about a lower middle-class couple growing up and facing the conflicts between their dreams and the realities of their lives. Here Springsteen finally settles on an appropriate distance between himself, the artist, and the characters in his songs. In terms of the situations he describes -- working construction jobs, joining a labor union, marrying young -- the characters in the song are obviously not Springsteen. But in terms of emotional distance, Springsteen empathizes completely with these characters, eliminating the ironic distance found in "Meeting Across the River," for example. Springsteen the sophisticated observer has vanished from these tales, leaving no one to intrude upon the relationships between his listeners and his characters.

"I'm a Rocker" is also indicative of a shift in Springsteen's perspective. A few albums ago, in "Rosalita," our hero was liberating his love from the clutches of her parents, boasting of a new record contract, and offering her a trip to the West Coast. And while all this was framed in a comic setting, the basic elements of the story came from real life. The liberation offered was sincere and meaningful. Now, in this later song, Springsteen starts by boasting of possessing super-hero trappings: a 007 watch, an I-Spy Beeper and a Batmobile, openly mocking as superhuman the powers he once thought he had. He continues in this vein throughout the song, comparing the task of winning his girl's heart back to the heroic feats of these fictional characters. So while there is just enough of an element of reality to provide some meaningful basis for the story, most of the song portrays the role of liberator as a comic book fantasy. And, significantly, the only true heroic quality celebrated in this song is the singer's constancy, his willingness to offer his girl love after she has had her heart broken by "some jerk who was tall, dark and handsome." 

Musically, Springsteen becomes much more economical and traditional on this album. Experimentation with song structures and instrumentation are abandoned, but this fits perfectly with the singer's newfound lyric and thematic intent. He is no longer writing to express himself, but to express the feelings of a community of which he is a part. And so the musical embellishments go, and reliance on traditional song structure is reinforced, as a proven means of communicating with his audience, and reaffirming his connection with that audience. 

Includes "Two Hearts," "Independence Day," "Hungry Heart," "You Can Look (But You Better Not Touch)," "The River," "Cadillac Ranch" and "I'm a Rocker."
