This album is an unparalleled achievement in rock music. The rich orchestral layers added to The Beatles' instrumentation, the sophistication of the lyrics, the intensity of the work done in the recording studio, the musical and thematic cohesion of the album as a whole, and the overall themes of altered states of perception and consciousness all mark this as a singular, monumental achievement. The release of this album set a high-water mark for rock artistry, based if nothing else on the sheer amount of labor that obviously went into recording the work. Whereas even the best rock up to this point had always suffered by being viewed as derivative, imitative, unoriginal, commercial and recreational, ??Sgt. Pepper's?? was clearly intended to be an aesthetic endeavor, and the first and most lasting effect it had on its audience was due primarily to the sheer extent of its ambition. 

Having said all this, it is important also to note that the album has some significant flaws. The natural appeal of much of the group's earlier music was often lost in the vast musical arrangements of the songs, which in retrospect can seem somewhat ponderous. While earlier efforts, no matter how long they were labored over in the studio, had the virtues of seeming relaxed and natural, much of this album seems forced and affected. 

Even The Beatles seemed to view ??Sgt. Pepper's?? as the end of a certain evolutionary path, and later efforts would see them intentionally regressing in some ways in order to get back to a more natural and simpler connection with their music. 

Yet this album still stands today as a monument to the possibilities of the art form. In retrospect, the album's chief failing may be that it was too obvious and extreme in its reliance on artifice that could only be produced at great effort in the recording studio. At the same time, though, this was also the album's greatest achievement, in that it made listeners, journalists and critics aware that rock music could indeed be an intentional creative act, and not merely a sometimes inventive popular pastime. 