The Band's second album stands out for two reasons. First, the songs when taken together cover an astonishing range of American history and character, including the fall of the South in the Civil War, the civilization of the American West, the retirement of a sailor, the amorous adventures of a trucker, the approach of tornadoes in the Midwest, the end of slavery -- the list goes on. This simple catalog doesn't do the collection justice, as each song is an exquisitely etched portrait of a uniquely American time, place or character.

The second notable attribute of this album is the attention to detail given to the recording of every song. John Simon was credited as co-producer on this album, as well as playing several instruments, and he deserves much of the credit for the way each track was delicately crafted with vocals and instruments best suited to each song. Robbie Robertson and John Simon had begun planning the recording sessions for this album on a week-long trip to Hawaii. Most of the recording was done in a makeshift studio put together in a pool house, part of the property in the Hollywood Hills that they were renting from Sammy Davis Jr. The Band took up residence here, giving them the time and focus necessary to get all the details exactly right. The drums used on the album were an old set with wooden rims found in an L.A. pawn shop, on a shopping expedition by Levon Helm and Garth Hudson. The group thought they provided the perfect sound for this album that was so focused on America's past. ("Bowman 2000, __The Band__":../closing/bibliography.html#bowman_band) 