Let me begin by admitting that the longest song on this album, "Murder Mystery" clocking in at 8:53, is at best an interesting but failed experiment. The song contains two different narratives set to verse that are read simultaneously by Reed and Morrison, with each getting its own stereo channel. This is one case where the lyrics prove truly unintelligible and ultimately irrelevant. The best you can say about this track is that is at least listenable, but it doesn't really add any value to the album.

With this single exception, however, this is truly one of the best collections of tracks in the entire rock canon. In a complete about-face from their prior album, the music on this album is quiet and understated. There are various interesting explanations for this: John Cale had left the group by this time, taking his screechy viola and avant-garde musical tendencies with him; Morrison and Reed had just bought twelve-string guitars, with which they were enamored; their electric instruments were all stolen just before the beginning of the recording sessions -- and some of these explanations are undoubtedly actually true. Whatever the causes, though, the results are haunting and timeless. 

Reed has said of the Velvets' music that "... we were always writing on a one-to-one level. So if you listen to the record, it's like somebody sitting across from you." ("Fricke 1995":../closing/bibliography.html#fricke) Nowhere is this description more apt than with this album. The characters on this collection are as interesting as on earlier efforts, but now there is a lens through which we view them. "Some Kinda Love" includes lines like "Put jelly on your shoulder, baby, lie down upon the carpet." But these are now combined with other lines that make some sort of perspective on all this clear: "Between thought and expression, lies a lifetime," and "No kinds of love are better than others." This same song includes a sinuous guitar riff that, like sex itself, is endlessly repeated, but with infinite variations and shadings. 

Another masterpiece is "Beginning to See the Light," which alternates serious lines about a relationship like "Here we go again, thought that you were my friend," with others like "There are problems in these times: oooh, but none of them are mine." What's great about this song is that the music for both subjects is entirely appropriate, and that these different subjects are contained and embraced within a single song. "Pale Blue Eyes" is another great one, with lines like "If I could make the world as pure / and strange as what I see / I'd put you in the mirror / I put in front of me / ...linger on / your pale blue eyes." Again, the music perfectly echoes the lyrics, with the word "on" stretching out while guitars play beautifully in the background, perfectly conveying the image of this timeless, transcendent moment. Lou Reed once recalled that Syracuse University's resident poet, Delmore Schwartz, advised him that he could do worse with his life than to devote it to reading James Joyce. ("Fricke 1995":../closing/bibliography.html#fricke) Like Joyce, the Velvets created a world so full of its own strange beauty that at moments like this it seems inhabitable: an alternate universe available at the touch of a button. 

