Jesse Winchester was one of the top singer-songwriters of his generation. No less an authority than Bob Dylan was quoted to that effect in the liner notes for Winchester's ??Best of?? CD. 

This talented artist was born and raised in the American South, but relocated to Canada to avoid being drafted. His early inability to tour in the US may have permanently stunted his commercial success as a recording artist, since he never achieved sales commensurate with his artistic achievements. 

Other performers were quick to recognize the merit of his songs, however, and Winchester has enjoyed consistent success as a songwriter, with other artists recording his compositions. (In this respect, he is similar to, although less prolific than, John Hiatt.) 

Winchester's recognition as a songwriter is well-deserved. He writes compact, intelligent lyrics that betray a wry and piercing self-knowledge. He writes on a variety of themes. His songs about places in the South ("Biloxi", "Bowling Green"), written while in exile in the cold Northern climes, are as hauntingly evocative as any recorded. "Snow," from his self-titled debut, and co-written by Robbie Robertson, is a comic look at the plight of an inveterate Southerner stranded in Canada at the start of a long, cold winter. Other songs speak convincingly on philosophical issues, through carefully detailed stories, betraying character through thoughts and actions, and through carefully worded observations of their plights. 

Most movingly, though, Winchester writes of the tragic human inability to find lasting love and deep intimacy. In songs like "Yankee Lady," "The Brand New Tennessee Waltz," and "Dangerous Fun," he tells stories about people who find love, and then turn their backs on it, for all too human reasons. 

Throughout all of Winchester's body of work, perhaps influenced by his decision to move to Canada, there is a deep concern for human decisions and their consequences, with a careful eye on what is lost, as well as what is gained, at each fork in the road. His best songs always treat their characters with dignity, and recognition that there are no easy answers to the human dilemma. 

Musically, Winchester is today considered a folkie. His earlier work is more in the rock vein, but he seems to have drifted towards folk music simply as an easier, more efficient means of showcasing his songs. 

As a singer, Winchester is under-rated. He is always the most intelligent interpreter of his own songs. He has a smooth voice with a broad expressive range, and uses it to great effect on his albums. 


