Jimi Hendrix was the single most inventive electric guitarist in rock. He did more to extend the reach of the instrument than anyone else of his generation. He single-handedly demolished traditional definitions of music by playing and recording sounds made with his guitar that defied transposition or even explanation. One of the best examples of these effects is his playing of "The Star Spangled Banner," in which he essentially deconstructs the original composition and rebuilds it as a showcase for his guitar prowess, using his instrument to sonically illustrate the action taking place in the song. 

Realizing the potential of the recording studio, Hendrix built his own, with the most modern equipment available at the time. He consciously used this device to achieve effects not possible in concert. His recordings frequently feature unusual uses of the stereo channels, for instance, with instruments and sounds apparently moving from left to right and back again. Hendrix spent a great deal of time in the studio, trying to perfect his musical visions. 

Hendrix put his unique studio and guitar effects to good use in music that consistently sought to liberate his listeners from conventional modes of perception and expand their awareness. Songs like "Stone Free" and "If 6 Was 9" established a stance of defiant individuality and an accompanying refusal to conform to society's expectations. Anyone who did not live through the fifties and early sixties might have a hard time realizing the significance of these recordings, but this was a time when rigid conformity to narrow codes of dress and behavior were taken for granted throughout almost all of American society. 

Although Hendrix' attitude and musical style were new and innovative, his approach to collaboration was very rooted in the blues and rhythm and blues traditions. He worked most often in the trio format, with a minimum of other musicians. He was the lead singer, songwriter and featured instrumentalist on his recordings, much in the style of a Robert Johnson or a Chuck Berry. 

It is unfortunate that Hendrix got a chance to record only a handful of studio albums before dying at a young age from an entirely accidental overdose of sleeping pills. We will sadly never know how his music would have evolved and matured in later stages of his career.

Unfortunately, complicated legal wrangling over the rights to Hendrix' estate has at times impinged upon his artistic legacy. A visit to the "official" Jimi Hendrix web site, for example, exposes readers to press releases about law suits being brought against various parties for their use of Hendrix images, etc.   


