Phil Spector was the most famous and influential producer in the history of rock music. He was known for producing a distinctive "wall of sound," in which a number of instruments are blended together to create a single effect. Because of this technique, Spector resisted the introduction of stereo, preferring to have the sounds of multiple instruments mixed together in a single monaural track rather than separated into left and right channels.

Spector expanded the role of a producer. He owned and operated his own record company, co-wrote most of the material recorded under his supervision, selected the primary artists and supporting musicians for each session, and then orchestrated all of this talent to produce a unique artistic vision. As practiced by Spector, the role of producer was more akin to that of a director in film. He was really the only record producer to fully claim the role of __auteur,__ the primary creative and organizing force behind the music that he produced. Listen to how Hal Blaine, his favorite session drummer, described working with Spector.

bq. Phil is the greatest director in the world. He had a way of holding you. He treated the musicians like race horses: "Don't play yet. Don't play yet." He would rehearse the guitar player for an hour. He would rehearse the bass fiddles. He'd rehearse the band. "Everybody play, but Hal, don't play. I'm getting a sound here." Then he would say, "Hal, play now!" In the booth it was like charades. He would say, "Watch me," and you'd read his lips. He would give you an "easy, easy," and then he would give you a "Go crazy!" ("Weinberg":../closing/bibliography.html#weinberg) 

Spector also exemplified the power of collaboration. He relied on favorite singers and other supporting artists to give form to his works, much as Hollywood directors would rely on favorite actors and other creative personnel working behind the scenes. Again, let's see what Hal Blaine has to say on the subject.

bq. I've always maintained that one guy doesn't make a record. Phil Spector alone never made a great record. He made great records with all these people. Brother Julius, the little black man who used to clean up, he was part of that recording scene. Brother Julius must have been sixty-five or seventy years old, he'd sweep up the studio at Gold Star. Brother J. We'd give him money all the time. He used to come in and make suggestions like, "Hey, Mr. Spector, you sure is doing it!" "Hey, Hal, git those drums bigger!" ("Weinberg":../closing/bibliography.html#weinberg) 

Spector recordings featured the talents of Leon Russell on piano, Jack Nitzsche as arranger, Hal Blaine on drums, and Glen Campbell on guitar, just to name a few who went on to achieve some degree of fame and fortune later in their careers.


