In many ways, the original Traffic was a sort of British counterpart to Buffalo Springfield. Both groups got together in 1967, both released three albums, both titled their third albums to intentionally be their last, both enjoyed multiple singer/songwriters, both had talented multi-instrumentalists (both of whom were named "Steve"), both made excellent music, and both had members who went on to greater fame and fortune as parts of super groups. 

You can read the details about "Buffalo Springfield":buffalo_springfield.html on their page. In the case of Traffic, their third album was entitled ??Last Exit.?? The original group consisted of Dave Mason on vocals and guitar, Steve Winwood on vocals, keyboards, guitars and bass guitar, Chris Wood on flute and saxophone, and Jim Capaldi on drums. Dave Mason composed songs on his own, while Winwood, Wood and Capaldi often collaborated with each other on their compositions. Mason and Winwood both sang lead vocals, generally on their respective compositions. 

As with Buffalo Springfield, Traffic had an abundance of talent, and this was reflected on their albums, especially their self-titled second one. Listeners enjoyed lots of variety in style and pacing of the songs, vocals, and instrumentation. Unfortunately, as with Buffalo Springfield, there was not enough cohesion to keep all this talent together for more than a few albums. Dave Mason struck out on his own, much like Neil Young with the Springfield. Winwood left briefly to become part of Blind Faith, along with Eric Clapton and Ginger Baker (2/3 of Cream). 

The group eventually reformed, without Dave Mason, and continued to record and tour under the Traffic name, but never with the original group's same richness of talent. It was a stretch for the three remaining original band members to compose enough quality material for each album. Partly in order to compensate for this deficiency, the group evolved a recording style that included lots of loose, jazzy improvisation, and eventually included other players so that they could duplicate this sound on stage. While the best of this material was pretty good, it was never quite as much fun as their original work.

The original configuration of Traffic had a unique sound. The group lived communally in a cottage in Berkshire, England, and the resulting music reflected this democratic spirit of collaboration. The band's oft-expressed motto was "to sound like the same group but never to sound the same," and they generally succeeded in this ambition. Lyrically, they were innovative. Their first three albums had the notable distinction of not containing a single cut that could be mistaken for a love song. Instead, they sang about failed relationships ("Feelin' Alright"), dream-like allegories ("Forty Thousand Headmen"), and the foibles of their contemporaries ("Medicated Goo"). 

Every composition was distinctive, and their recordings were equally creative. Like The Beatles, the group had a sense of spatial composition while recording. They had the courage to leave enough space in their music to contain abundant instrumental coloring. Their unusual instrumentation, relying heavily on Winwood's organ and Wood's flute, gave their recordings a jazzy sound, yet the music was always in support of the song, and never simply there to impress or to fill out the track. Although I've compared them to Buffalo Springfield, they were also like The Band in their ability to use a variety of unusual instruments, their focus on making each track a unique recording, and their insistence on fashioning each track around the particular characteristics of a specific song. 

The group was not afraid to sound quirky or idiosyncratic, and while this resulted in some dispensable nonsense on their first album, it also gave them the freedom to express an unusually broad range of feelings and images. 

The group's first two albums benefited from the production talents of Jimmy Miller, who was also working with such notables as "The Rolling Stones":rolling_stones.html during this same period, and with equal success. Miller had a wonderful talent for layering instruments on a recording in such a way that each could be clearly and distinctly heard, yet complementing each other so as to make the whole much greater than the sum of the parts. His production strengths were a perfect match for the instrumental abilities of the group.


